Good morning Mr. Maynard,

I am sorry for the delay; my colleague in charge of contaminated sites near the Lachine Canal was out of the office for a few days, so we had a hard time to confirm the info.

Please find below answers to your questions, and do not hesitate to contact us if you have further enquiries.

Thank you!

******************

[Start of lightly-edited older questions/answers -- this line was added by Patrick Maynard -- all other edits from A.G-C.]

Why could it potentially be a problem to have high population near contaminated sites?
Public safety is a top priority for Parks Canada and the Agency strives to ensure that visitors of the Lachine Canal have a safe and enjoyable experience.

Regarding these sites in particular, Parks Canada is not able to provide you with more information as the Agency is not the lead in assessing risks associated with contaminated sites. For further assistance, please contact the Treasury Board Secretariat at media@tbs-sct.gc.ca.

You may also refer to the Federal Contaminated Sites Portal to get further information on the federal approach to contaminated sites and guidance on assessing ecological and human health risks associated with contaminated sites.

Why has this level of contamination been allowed to persist up until now at the Lachine sites in question?
This level has not been allowed to persist. Parks Canada has been taking lead in ensuring that both sites 13.3 and 13.8 have completed six steps of the 10-step process to manage federal contaminated sites and continues to do so in order to complete the next steps in the years to come.

There was media talk a year or two ago about a linear ice rink debuting on the canal in "winter 2017," but I can't seem to find any information on whether that actually happened this most recent January/February. Do you know if a skating rink was indeed debuted?
Parks Canada continues to collaborate with its partners and municipal authorities along the Lachine Canal in order to develop new recreational and tourism opportunities that will allow visitors to connect and learn about their heritage.

The City of Montreal has carried out ice tests on the Lachine Canal in the winter 2015-2016 and 2016-2017. For any questions related to this subject, please contact the City of Montreal, the project lead.

Do the other answers from your (again very much appreciated) October 14 email still generally apply? If not, please mention the parts that have changed.
Please see changes in colour in the previous answers below for additional information.

***********

I did an analysis of publicly available XML data describing the Federal Contaminated Sites Inventory. Based on this analysis, I have identified site 13.2, site 13.3 and site 13.8 as being near the densest populations of any active high-priority federal cleanup sites, based on population counts within a 1-kilometer radius. Can you confirm this finding? 

Public safety is a top priority for Parks Canada and the Agency strives to ensure that visitors of the Lachine Canal have a safe and enjoyable experience.

The Lachine Canal National Historic Site is located in the Montreal urban area. However, the sites you are referring to are transit areas rather than visitor rest areas.   

Sites 13.3 and 13.8 are managed by the Agency; however, Parks Canada is unable to confirm your analysis as we are not the lead on the Federal Contaminated Sites Inventory.  For further assistance, please contact the Treasury Board Secretariat.

Lest I oversell the importance of FCSI sites to my readers, could you describe what types of sites/cleanups are included -- and, just as importantly, omitted -- within the FCSI database? (For example, describing whether the FCSI database includes privately owned, non-federal cleanup sites, whether this database covers run-of-the-mill municipal sewage spills, etc.,.) 

Parks Canada sites in the FCSI represent only 3.2% of all active federal contaminated sites listed in the inventory. For further assistance on this topic, please contact the Treasury Board Secretariat’s media relations team at media@tbs-sct.gc.ca.  

It appears that site 13.2 has been cleaned relatively completely. But when looking at the FCSI records for the other two sites listed above, it appears that both have been stalled at the same stage of remediation -- a "reclassification" stage where each site has languished -- since 2011. (I base this assessment on the yearly tabs at the bottom of each record.) Can you talk a bit about why cleanup seems to have stalled for these two high-priority sites?

Both sites 13.3 and 13.8 have completed step six of the 10-step process to manage federal contaminated sites. A reclassification of the sites was completed following new data obtained from a detailed environmental site assessment.

Site 13.3 is part of a wider project to build a new bicycle path in this area. Contaminated soils at site 13.3 will be managed accordingly when the construction of the bicycle path will begin. Recommendations from the human health and ecological risk assessment completed in 2014 will serve as guidance to manage appropriately the contaminated soils of site 13.3. 

Site 13.8 is located on the south side of the Lachine Canal, across from site 13.3. A human health and ecological risk assessment is planned for this site in 2016-18.  Future action at this site will depend on the conclusions and recommendations of this risk assessment. 

Could you describe the type(s) of cleanups that will eventually occur on these two sites? (For example, are we likely to see removal of the soil in question, or are we likely to see a "capping" process used to contain the contaminants?) 

Risk assessment studies are essential in determining which course of action is appropriate to take. Clean-up options for site13.8 will be determined following the completion of a risk assessment for these areas. The risk assessment for site 13.3 was completed in 2014. Various clean-up options are currently investigated, such as the removal of the contaminated soil and “capping”.

It appears from a 1996 document that these two sites (sites 13.3 and 13.8) might be the former sites of facilities run by Stelco and Mills Steel Products. Can you confirm that?

Site 13.3 stretches along the Lachine Canal in an area that was in part adjacent to the Stelco which was formerly known as the Montreal Rolling Mills Company.  Site 13.8 was not part or adjacent to the Stelco Company. Located on the opposite side of the canal, across from site 13.3, site 13.8 was the location of the Canadian Bag Company and the Montreal Cordage Company. 

Could you provide a likely timeline for the cleanup of these two sites?

Contaminated soils at site 13.3 will be managed during the construction phase of the new bicycle path project in 2018-19.   

Timelines for the cleanup of site 13.8 will be determined following the completion of a risk assessment currently under way for the area. 

Are we likely to see closure of the bike path during cleanup for these sites? 

Public safety is of utmost importance for Parks Canada and the Agency strives to ensure that visitors of the Lachine Canal have a safe and enjoyable experience. No closure of the Lachine Canal’s path is planned at this point in regards to site cleanups. 

Are we likely to see the closure of park land during cleanup for these sites?

Parks Canada takes all necessary measures to ensure public safety during the cleanup of sites, including: fencing in the work zones, installing appropriate signage and detour plans, if needed. 

Are either of these sites dangerous for residents? How (if at all) does that contrast with sites elsewhere? 

The sites do not pose risks to neighbouring residents or visitors, due to the nature of the contaminants at the sites and the presence of an overlaying vegetation cover. This is similar to other sites along the Lachine Canal.  

What other information would you like to convey about these sites and/or the FCSI? 

Parks Canada is responsible for protecting and presenting nationally significant examples of Canada’s natural and cultural heritage, like the Lachine Canal National Historic Site. 

Parks Canada continues to benefit from the Federal Contaminated Sites Action Plan (FCSAP) program to manage its high-priority sites. As with sites 13.3 and 13.8 at the Lachine Canal, Parks Canada aims to eliminate risks to human health and the environment while reducing the federal government's environmental liability. Managing contaminated sites is an iterative process that usually spans over many years. Parks Canada updates its contaminated sites data in the FCSI on an annual basis.

For specific questions regarding the FCSI, please contact the Treasury Board Secretariat’s media relations team at media@tbs-sct.gc.ca. 

-30-


Audrey Godin-Champagne

Agente de communications et de relations publiques, Direction des Relations externes
Voies navigables au Québec - Parcs Canada / Gouvernement du Canada 
